Add ambient-loader proposal (#63)
nodejs/loaders: doc/design/proposal-ambient-loaders.md

# Ambient Loaders Design

## Problem

Loaders let side logic be applied when resolving import statements. However, this only applies to the main application: loaders themselves aren’t currently affected by any other loaders. As a result, 3rd-party loaders cannot be injected if accessing them requires going through another loader. For instance, the following doesn’t work:

```

> node --loader pnp --loader ts-node ./my-tool.mts

Reviewer: When you say that it doesn’t work, I assume what you mean is that it doesn’t work when there’s no `node_modules` folder. In other words, if this were a more traditional app with a `package.json` that contained `ts-node` as a dependency, and someone had run `npm install`, it _would_ work; it only doesn’t work in this case because you’re trying to avoid the install step and use PNP instead. Am I understanding you correctly?

Author: PnP is just an example. A loader that would allow node_modules folders to be compressed archives would have similar problems.

Reviewer: Sure. What I meant was, you should explain this in the text, that you're assuming no `node_modules` here.

Author: Clarified 👍

```

Indeed, importing `ts-node` would require the `pnp` loader to contribute to the resolution, but it’s not what happens today: both `pnp` and `ts-node` are resolved by the default Node resolver, preventing `ts-node` from resolving.

The reason for that is an attempt to keep loaders as isolated as possible, to allow followup improvements like reusing them across workers or scaling them up. If all loaders were influenced by prior loaders, they’d effectively coalesce into a single one, which would prevent such work. Still, the problem remains.

## Proposal

If loaders cannot generally influence each other, we could have a subset of them do. Indeed, not all loaders affect the resolution so much that they are a requirement to followup loaders. We could have two levels of loaders:

> - Ambient loaders would be defined via the `--ambient-loader <module>` flag. They would be loaded sequentially, and would affect the resolution of all followup loaders.

Reviewer: If I registered two ambient loaders, would the first one affect the resolution of the second?

Author: Yes.

Reviewer 2: Oh, wait, what. I did not get that from this doc. I understood ambient loaders to work in tandem like how regular loaders do (one regular loader does not affect the other), just specifically when loading a regular loader.

```suggestion
- Ambient loaders would be defined via the `--ambient-loader <module>` flag. They would be loaded sequentially and would affect the resolution of all subsequent ambient loaders.
```

Making ambient loaders affect each other sounds like a pandora's box.

Author: Updated with your second wording

> Making ambient loaders affect each other sounds like a pandora's box.

Why that?

Reviewer 2: > Updated with your second wording

Thanks!

>> Making ambient loaders affect each other sounds like a pandora's box.
> Why that?

Wouldn't that open the door for reentry?

Author: To be honest I'm still not sure I see a problem with reentrance, we may have different behaviours in mind 😃

But in this case it shouldn't be reentrant anyway: it's just using the result of the previous loader to load the next one, so all execution occurs in the same order and we don't go twice in the same loader during the same resolution pass.

Reviewer 2: What about when one ambient loader depends on another in a circular fashion?

Author: Do you have an example?

The closest I can think of would be if, say, we had `/foo.zip/bar.tgz/qux.zip/index.js`, but isn't this pattern true as well for regular module imports?

- Regular loaders would be defined via the `--loader <module>` flag. They would be loaded in parallel (at least conceptually). Because they’d only be loaded after the ambient loaders have finished evaluating, their resolution would be affected by ambient loaders.

## Example

Let’s imagine we have the following loaders:

- zip, which adds zip file support to the `fs` module

> - pnp, which adds support for the Plug’n’Play resolution

Reviewer 3: Could this link to some place where `Plug’n’Play resolution` is explained? I vaguely know that Yarn has this feature but I don't know what it is.

Author: It's documented [here](https://yarnpkg.com/features/pnp). The page got written some time ago so it could benefit from a new pass with a fresh eye, but it gives a high level idea of the concept.

Reviewer: Do you mind adding the link to the document?

Author: Done

- yaml, which adds yaml file support to `import`
- coffeescript, which adds coffeescript file support to `import`

The first two are critical to a successful resolution: without `zip`, PnP wouldn't be able to load files from the zip archives. Without `pnp`, Node would look for the `yaml` and `coffeescript` loaders into a `node_modules` folder, which would fail. On the other hand, `yaml` and `coffeescript` don't depend on each other.

The command line would end up like this (in practice `--ambient-loader` would probably be passed via `NODE_OPTIONS` rather than directly on the command line):

```
node --ambient-loader zip
     --ambient-loader pnp
     --loader yaml
     --loader coffeescript
     ./path/to/script.mjs
```

When resolving `coffeescript`, we’d go into the `pnp` loader (but not `coffeescript`, which isn’t an ambient loader). The `pnp` loader itself would have been loaded after the `zip` loader ran, causing its `fs` import to be resolved to a custom module adding zip support to `fs` rather than the usual builtin module.

> 

Reviewer: A perhaps simpler example would be a loader that is itself written in TypeScript. So like:

```
node --ambient-loader ts-node --loader ./my-loader.ts ./app.ts
```

Or CoffeeScript or anything else. (We’ve generally been using CoffeeScript in examples because it’s simpler than TypeScript, in that its compiler doesn’t do things like convert `import`/`export` into CommonJS `require`, and it doesn’t have an equivalent of `tsconfig.json`).

Author: I purposefully used a slightly more complex example to also cover interactions between two loaders of the same type, both ambient or regular, but I can add an extra one.

Reviewer: I think two examples are better than one 😄  Do you mind adding the simple example too?

# Ambient Loaders Design

## Problem

Loaders let side logic be applied when resolving import statements. However, this only applies to the main application: loaders themselves aren’t currently affected by any other loaders. As a result, 3rd-party loaders cannot be injected if accessing them requires going through another loader.

For instance, imagining a loader that would allow modules to be loaded from a `node_modules.zip` file (instead of the typical folder), the following wouldn’t work:

```
node --loader zip --loader ts-node ./my-tool.mts
```

Indeed, importing `ts-node` would require the `zip` loader to contribute to the resolution (so that the final path loaded is `$PROJECT/node_modules.zip/ts-node` instead of `$PROJECT/node_modules/ts-node`, which doesn't exist), but it’s not what happens today: both `zip` and `ts-node` are resolved by the default Node resolver, preventing `ts-node` from resolving.

> The reason for that is an attempt to keep loaders as isolated as possible, to allow followup improvements like reusing them across workers or scaling them up. If all loaders were influenced by prior loaders, they’d effectively coalesce into a single one, which would prevent such work. Still, the problem remains.

Reviewer 3: Are we 100% certain that we cannot let regular loaders be influenced by prior loaders? I'm afraid that if ambient loaders seem more powerful than regular loaders, we will just end up with everyone always using `--ambient-loader` and forget about the other flag.

Reviewer 2: I think we said no because it would require reentrancy, and our preliminary thoughts on this Ambient Loader concept was that it's the nuclear option so it would be chosen very infrequently (too easy to foot-gun, so only worth it when you really need it and really know what you're doing).

Reviewer 4: I'd be curious to hear about reentrancy hazards that will crop up in the types of loaders that can be non-ambient.  E.g. a use-case where you don't need `--ambient-loader` and yet are doing something tricky enough that you're likely to footgun.  A simple source->source compiler such as a coffeescript loader wouldn't have any of these risks, I don't think.

Reviewer: @arcanis If you feel comfortable explaining it, do you mind adding a section to the document about reentrancy and its hazards and what this means for loaders/ambient loaders? Like perhaps how those issues can be addressed (or not) via ambient loaders, etc. Or what if we only allowed just one ambient loader?

Author: As I mentioned in [this thread](https://github.com/nodejs/loaders/pull/63#discussion_r807132506), I'm not sure myself I see the problems with reentrancy (nor I see it avoidable for resolution in general, or particularly affected by ambient loaders), so I'd prefer if someone else could make a writeup.

Reviewer 4: Who is concerned about these hypothetical reentrancy concerns?  From an outside perspective, it appears as if perhaps it was hypothesized but no one could think of any examples.

Reviewer: > Who is concerned about these hypothetical reentrancy concerns? From an outside perspective, it appears as if perhaps it was hypothesized but no one could think of any examples.

@bmeck was the one who knew the most about them.

Reviewer 2: I'm also concerned about reentrancy, but for me that doesn't block adding the proposal itself, just a concern about a later stage.

The command line would end up like this:

```
node --ambient-loader ts
     --loader my-custom-loader
     ./path/to/script.mjs
```

## More Contrived Example

Let’s imagine we have the following loaders:

- zip, which adds zip file support to the `fs` module
- pnp, which adds support for the Plug’n’Play resolution ([more details](https://yarnpkg.com/features/pnp))
- yaml, which adds yaml file support to `import`
- coffeescript, which adds coffeescript file support to `import`

The first two are critical to a successful resolution: without `zip`, PnP wouldn't be able to load files from the zip archives. Without `pnp`, Node would look for the `yaml` and `coffeescript` loaders into a `node_modules` folder, which would fail. On the other hand, `yaml` and `coffeescript` don't depend on each other.

The command line would end up like this (in practice `--ambient-loader` would probably be passed via `NODE_OPTIONS` rather than directly on the command line):

```
node --ambient-loader zip

>      --ambient-loader pnp

Reviewer 4: I believe there is some debate about the correct ordering of these, based on Slack discussion:

https://node-js.slack.com/archives/CEVD3CX33/p1647532211808939

The competing factors are a) which ordering is more intuitive, and b) if ordering should be done such that `argv` takes precedence over `NODE_OPTIONS`

- Regular loaders would be defined via the `--loader <module>` flag. They would be loaded in parallel (at least conceptually). Because they’d only be loaded after the ambient loaders have finished evaluating, their resolution would be affected by ambient loaders.

## Simple Example

Let's imagine we have the following loaders:

> - ts, which adds support for TS files
> - my-custom-loader, which is written in TypeScript
> 
> Without the TS loader, we wouldn't be able to even load the following custom loader. But by marking it as an ambiant loader, Node will make sure it'll be taken into account when resolving (and loading) my-custom-loader.
> 
> 
> The command line would end up like this:
> 
> ```
> node --ambient-loader ts
>      --loader my-custom-loader
>      ./path/to/script.mjs
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `ts`, which adds support for TypeScript files
- `my-custom-loader`, which is written in TypeScript

Without the `ts` loader, we wouldn’t be able to even load the following custom loader. But by marking it as an ambient loader, Node will make sure it’ll be taken into account when resolving (and loading) `my-custom-loader`.

The command line would end up like this:

\`\`\`
node –ambient-loader ts \
     –loader my-custom-loader \
     ./path/to/script.mjs
\`\`\`
```
